Here is the current (but not perfect) procedure for creating a release:

= Prerequisites =

   * GnuPG installed and configured and your public key uploaded to one of the key servers. uimaFIT is deployed to Maven Central, which requires that digitial signatures are in place.
   * Maven 2.2.1+
   * `settings.xml` file set up as explained in the [https://docs.sonatype.org/display/Repository/Sonatype+OSS+Maven+Repository+Usage+Guide Sonatype OSS Maven Repository Usage Guide]

= CHANGES =

Be sure that the CHANGES files are up-to-date

= Update Javadoc =

First update the javadoc pages:
  * temporarily edit the `pom.xml` file to specify the release version (rather than the snapshot version)
  * to avoid subversion complaints about being out of synch, I find it helpful to perform `svn update` and `svn cleanup` before the next step.
  * run the following
{{{ 
>cd uimafit-parent/uimaFIT
>mvn javadoc:javadoc
>cp -R target\site\apidocs .
}}}
  * revert the `pom.xml`file using
{{{ 
>svn revert pom.xml
}}}
  * commit files to the repository before performing the release so that they get tagged correctly.
{{{ 
>svn commit -m "Javadoc update" apidocs
}}}

= Maven release =

{{{
>cd uimafit-parent
>mvn release:prepare
>mvn release:perform
}}}

If you run into login or signing problems, try specificing your username, password and keyname like this. Mind that if you do that on a machine with other users, it may leak your password via the process list and shell history. So better do this on a private machine.

{{{
 mvn -Dusername=GOOGLECODE_USERNAME -Dpassword=GOOGLECODE_PASSWORD -Darguments="-Dkeyname=GOOGLECODE_USERNAME" release:prepare
}}}

If "mvn release:perform" appears to hang check to see if it is asking for your GPG password.  Enter is carefully if so.  

= Deploy to Maven Central via Sonatype OSS =

   * Go to the [https://oss.sonatype.org Nexus OSS repository] and log in with your Sonatype JIRA account. 
   * Open the *Staging Repositories* page, select *uimaFIT* from the list, select the release you have just performed from the lower part
   * Select it and click *Close* in the action bar above the list. Enter a meaningful comment, e.g. "uimaFIT 0.9.14 release". 
   * Select it again and click *Release*. Again enter e meaningful comment, e.g. "uimaFIT 0.9.14 release".
   * wait an hour or so for the sync process to run.  Check that the new version is available [http://repo1.maven.org/maven2/org/uimafit/uimafit/ here].

=Update googlecode project=

*Javadoc*: After that update the Javadoc link on the main page via the [http://code.google.com/p/uimafit/admin admin interface] to point to the new release, e.g. to

{{{
http://uimafit.googlecode.com/svn/tags/uimafit-parent-0.9.14/uimaFIT/apidocs/index.html
}}}

*Project artifacts*: The new artifacts have not yet been uploaded to googlecode via the release steps.  This task (as well as the javadoc generation) can probably be accomplished using the antrun plugin (see [http://maven.riedelcastro.org/gcupload-maven-plugin/usage.html this].)  Uploading the new downloadable files can be done by clicking on the Downloads tab above and following the instructions.  The files should be located in the target directory.  

*Update current version*: One final thing to do is edit the front page to have the correct xml for a project's pom file - i.e. edit the snippet 
{{{
<version>0.9.14</version>
}}}
so that it is up-to-date.

= Send an announcement =
After all of the above steps are complete, send an announcement to uimafit-users@googlegroups.com. Here is a template for the email:

{{{
subject: uimaFIT <version> released

The uimaFIT development team is pleased to announce a new release of uimaFIT, version <version>.  To view the REAME for this release, please visit:
http://code.google.com/p/uimafit/source/browse/tags/uimafit-parent-1.1.0/uimaFIT/README?r=498

To view the CHANGES for this release, please visit:
http://code.google.com/p/uimafit/source/browse/tags/uimafit-parent-1.1.0/uimaFIT/CHANGES?r=498

Please visit the project home page for information about how to add uimaFIT as a dependency to your Maven built project:
http://uimafit.googlecode.com

If you do not use Maven, the latest version of uimaFIT can be obtained from the downloads page:
http://code.google.com/p/uimafit/downloads/list
}}}